Étude: Agiliuf

Agiliuf was one of the small children condemned to Hell for all eternity for not having been baptized before dying. It was not often you ran across children in Hell—or at least one prefers to imagine as much—but St. Agustine assures us, and St. Gregory the Great later confirms, and as later reaffirmed at the Councils of Lyons, Florence, and Trent, this does happen from time to time, and that such children are subject to the same strict rules as their adult counterparts—although the precise nature of their punishment remains a matter of debate. Aliuf was free to wander about the premises so long as he followed the rules, and would often visit the damned of the eigth circle, whose task it was to shovel the blazing faetor accumulating in the fourth malbowge into tall, fiery, nitric stacks that would topple and collapse on top of them over and over again. [Memory was a strange animal in hell, at times lying in rest, at times insomniac somnambulo] For how many ages it had gone on like this Algiuf did not know. And for all eternity it was yet to go on.
	“Hey-ho!  Quitting time!”
	At “quitting time” each day when the demon taskmasters would play that dirty and evil trick of blowing a whistle and calling out “quitting time!”  When the demons were rolling on the ground with laughter, and his fellow souls moaning with renewed remorse, Agluf would not get the joke and slipped away innocently and unnoticed. He would take walks then among the tortures of the other damned in other circles. conflagrations of souls erupting from the molten lakes around him and swirling through the cavernous expanse like leaf storms—whole swirling shoals of lost souls!—dashing themselves at last against some reef of empty fumes. Not taking much interest in the various methods of torture, which were not, in truth, terribly inventive from one case to the other, he marveled rather at the cavernous expanses of darkness which stretched, so it seemed, infinitely above his blistering feet.  



One of his favorite places to stroll was the banks of the Styx, which are guarded by centaurs.  The centaurs, so it seemed to him, were the most intriguing beasts of Hell.  Trotting up and down the banks, they did not carry weapons or instruments of torture (apart from their crossbows, which always remained slung over their backs and were never used), and did not attack the damned who were boiling in the river, but merely corralled them whenever they tried to climb out.
“Shoo!  Shoo, there!  Back you go!” they would call out good-naturedly, twirling their hoofs in the air.  They allowed Aigluf to approach them, and often he got quite close to them, but they ignored him pompously.  Once, Agulf saw, when a demon suddenly burst forth onto the bank and, with murderous zeal, began flaying the skin of the damned who were under the centaurs’ charge; the centaurs circled round him and confiscated his tenterhooks.  Aigiliuf could not hear the words exchanged, but he saw a lot of finger waving, and, finally, the centaurs punctuated their reprimand with a brisk slap on the demon’s face.  The demon let out a genuine howl of shame and ran back into the dense undergrowth with his spade-tail between his legs.
From every socket and crevice along the way of these walks, meanwhile, tormented souls emerged like little spiders from their hidden nests.  Taking him for a mortal, a traveler from above, they would ask him of news from Florence and Khanbaliq, and of the other places that had been their homes in the life before.  But he was not mortal of course, and he told them: “But I am not mortal!  I live here like you!”
	“Fie!” they would call out, “and how is it you just prance about as you please?”
	“I just do!  I swear!”
	“Fie!  He means to mock us, he does!  Well, you’ll get yours, you just wait, little boy!”
	“But I swear!  I am damned just like you, and I live here.”
	“And then how is it you just come and go as you please?  Ha!  He must think we’re imbeciles.  Well, there’ll be the Devil to pay for your insolence!”
	“But, I swear—”
But Aguilif could not get a word in edgewise at this point; and he moved on, marveling at the implacable disbelief of the damned.
	The terminus of these strolls was invariably the circle of giants, the circle before the last, where the giant Nimrod lived.  Agulif (the vapors of Hell always distorted the spelling of his name) would approach from the edge of the pit above so that he was more or less eye-level with Nimrod.  Their exchanges were always enjoyable and Nimrod appreciated the fact that Agiliuf could understand him when he spoke.  Through his conversations with Nimrod, Aigilf had learned that Nimrod had been condemned to Hell for multiplying the languages of the earth, which was said to have spread confusion.  His punishment in Hell was that he should never again be understood by anyone, but somehow Ailiuf could understand him.
	“That’s because when there’s a problem understanding,” said Agiluf, “it’s because you’re not listening in the right way that you have to.”
	“Brahr breahr bah-bee boo!”
	“Yeah.”
No one else, Nimrod once confided to Aiglif, had ever been able to understand him when he spoke.  That was his punishment.  And he had to wear a great big horn around his neck, which was intended as a symbol of shame and as a mockery of his inarticulate solitude, but which, during the course of eternity, he had slowly begun to revaluate as a means of expression.
“And that big horn tied around your neck?  What’s that for?”
“Breeeh brahr breeboo.  Brarh brahr bree-bree-breeauah!”
“Oh?  What kind of special occasions?”
At this point in the conversation, demons who had overheard them would approach the edge of the circle and begin jeering at Nimrod:
“Blah, blah, blee, blee!  Look at me I’m Nimrod I can’t talk right!  Ha, ha!” for example, they would say in a mocking tone, or, “Look at me I’m Nimrod I’m a big dummy and I talk funny ha!”  They would also cast their long tenterhooks at him as they shouted these taunts, but the hooks would merely tinkle off his chest like little pebbles thrown against a cliff face; and this, naturally, infuriated the demons still more, and they would hurl more verbal abuse at him:
“Can’t talk right, can’t talk right!  Blow your horn!”
“Blow your horn!”
“Why don’t you just blow your horn stupid, if you can’t talk right dummy!”
“Dummy-stupid blow your horn!”
And Nimrod’s giant fingers would begin to fondle his horn nervously.
It was clear from Agiliuf’s conversations with Nimrod that Nimrod did not like to blow his horn for just any odd reason, but that his horn, over the course of eternity, had become for him a means of expressing the stirrings deep within his chest, which had gone unexpressed for all eternity.  Even though the horn was meant as a mockery and an eternal reminder of his inability to communicate, it had begun to take on this significance for him in recent aeons.  Nimrod was still shy about it, and reserved his horn blowing for only the most “special occasions,” but the revaluated significance was growing stronger.  And here the demons were forcing him to blow his horn out of mere spite!  Bastards!
“Dummy stupid dummy stupid!”
“Blah!  Look at me I’m Nimrod and I can’t talk right!”
“Blah blah!  Look at me I’m stupid!”
Well!  Even the stoutest soul could only take so much of this relentless abuse, and Nimrod’s fingers began to fondle the horn around his neck, and then at last his hands clasped the horn and he blew a long, lugubrious note:

Baaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaahhoooooooooooooooo!
	
which echoed in every corner of Hell.


When Agiluf returned from these sallies and told his fellows what he had seen, they would berate him.  “Look,” they would tell him, as if in explanation, “this is Hell!”  But before they could finish, they would be skewered through by a demon’s pike and tossed up through the toxic fumes into another bowge.
“Shhhhhh, this is Hell!” another would cry out, “and there is no talking allowed!  You wanna get us all in trouble?”  (“No talking” was one of the rules of Hell, although in Hell it was impossible to know when rules would be enforced, and when, out of malicious deceit, a blind eye would be cast).  And then he, too, would be flayed and hooked through by the demons’ skewers, and lobbed into one of the other pits of darkness.
	Still another of Agluf’s fellow souls would step forward.  “Don’t you see, little boy?  This is Hell!  All that about going on strolls, impossible!”
	And then he would be crushed beneath a blazing stack of faetor which would fall over on top of him just then.
When his fellows were hooked through and lobbed into the air, Aluf peered into the darkness to see what monster had done it.  But this was another of the strange things about Hell: when he saw there in the darkness what monster or demon had skewered his fellow, well, what he saw there in the darkness were a bunch of sulfurous fumes, but no demons per se.  “Well,” he thought to himself, “there must surely be some monster back there in the darkness who skewered my good friend and lobbed him up into the fumy vault,” and he peered harder into the sulfurous darkness, looking for the demon or monster who had done it, or perhaps the minotaur had come down or the erinyes, or maybe one of the gorgons had done it—yes that was it! one of the gorgons had done it, surely!
But no, peering there into the sulfurous pitch, no, Aiguilif could not say that he had in fact seen a gorgon, although it had been a good guess.
Moreover, Ailuif had never actually seen one of the big monsters attack a soul.  Sometimes Agiliuf went up to the walls around the sixth circle (the walls of Dis) and ran through the legs of the minotaur who stood at the passage.  The minotaur would let out a howl and hurl himself on the ground, kicking and pounding the ground with his fists, which did not torment Agulf in the least, and was even rather amusing.  Agiliuf did not know it (he had died a very, very long time ago) but the monsters of Hell were feeling rather intimidated by recent developments in weapons technology on earth and were feeling insecure about themselves.


One day, Aigilf decided to go to Heaven.
He was strolling along as was his habit, without a care in the world, when lo! he saw a figure strolling towards him in the opposite direction.  He jumped aside and hid behind a rock, fearing it might be a monster.  But when the figure approached, it turned out to be an old man, bearded and quite gray.  Agluf sprung from his hiding place.
“Who are you, sir?” he asked.
“I am a Peripatetic,” he said, hoisting himself onto a broad, flat stone.
“Oh yes, from the first circle.”
“That’s correct, my boy.”
“Hey, do you ever notice anything…odd about this place?” asked Agluf.
“Like what?”
“I’ve noticed, for example, I saw, once…the centaurs, who live on the banks of the Styx, they....”
“Hm’mm,” said the Peripatetic, nodding his head.
“And do you notice, many times you don’t see the demons when they punish the souls…”
“Hm’mmm,” said the Peripatetic with a knowing glance.  Apparently he had already beheld such things, and perhaps had even contemplated them at length.
He stepped up onto a smooth obsidian perch and began to inspect its surface.
“What are you up to?” asked Ailif.
“In all the eternity of my damnation I have not yet come across a single smooth, flat stone in Hell.  They are all jagged and oxidized, you know.  But yesterday as I strolled by here I saw this broad, flat stone, devoid of sharp edges and corrugations….  Well!  I resolved then to descend on the morrow to set aside my staff and my ambles for a while, and to recline upon this rare stone in contemplation of this place, for one aeon.”
As he said this, the Peripatetic set down his staff and sat down in a curious cross-legged position.  He trained his eyes aloft, transfixing all the evil and darkness of Hell in his gaze; his pupils deepened; and then he shut his eyes.
“Oh,” responded Aigulf.
“What are you doing?” asked Ailiuf.
“Zazen,” said the Peripatetic without opening his eyes.
“Huh?”
“You see, my boy, we in the first circle were damned because of our pagan orientation; that is, we were punished for not having known God, even though it was not possible to know God since he did not yet exist.  Not a very fair deal by anyone’s standard, but we were pious and went along with it for centuries and millennia, until at last, not too long ago, we realized that God was cool.”
“When did you realize that God was cool?”
“About the time of the Lover Man Sessions—you know, Charlie Parker.”
“Charlie Parker?”
“Well, there were a lot of contributors; Miles Davis came out with the Birth of the Cool around the same time.  There was Charles Mingus, John Coltrane, and of course you had Benny Moré and Perez Prado down in Cuba.  Yeah man!  Dangerous!  Bee-skee-dat, doop, doop, shawoop…” The Peripatetic, carried away by his nostalgia, broke into a bit of scatting briefly.
“Oh.”
“And then when we saw that God was cool like that, we knew He wouldn’t keep us here in Hell for such a jive gig.  So we all put our heads together and got to thinking…”
“Oh,” said Aigiluf, “I want to go to Heaven.”
The Peripatetic opened his eyes.
“Heaven?” he murmured, bringing his hand to his beard.  And then, after remaining silent for a long time, he said, “What a good idea, my boy.  I might have joined you had I not just resolved to recline upon this rock for one aeon, contemplating Hell.”
Algiuf said goodbye to the Peripatetic and turned up the slope towards the Fifth Circle.
“Ahoy there, traveler!  What news from Florence?  Eh, it’s you again!  Fie on you!  Fie!  This is Hell, or did no one tell you?  No walking about in Hell!  Fie!”
	When he reached the Fifth Circle his companions we’re still shoveling the blazing faetor into tall shit stacks, even though it was now long after quitting time.  Aglf approached them and bade them adieu, but they were engrossed in their needless chore and paid no attention to him.
“So long friends,” he said to them, at last, climbing up onto the ridge of the malbowge and waving his hand, “So long!”
“So long?  Wha—?  Whadya mean ‘so long?’  Where do you think you’re going?”
“Heaven.”
“But, why, you just don’t seem to understand anything sonny!  This is Hell, see, with a capital ‘H!’”
“There’s no going to Heaven when you’re in Hell!  No taking pleasant strolls, no distracting conversations, well, you’ll get yours, sonny!  You’ll get yours!”
“Well, goodbye,” he said.
Algiuf’s infernal companions had never been particularly tender towards him, but they were his infernal companions all the same, and Aliuf could not help but shed a tear at their parting.


“Hey wait just a moment,” he heard from behind him as walked up past the fourth circle, “Where is it you’re going again?”
Turning around, he saw a group of curious souls.
“Heaven.”
“Ha!  And what?  Think you’ve suffered enough?  You have suffered quite a bit, it’s true!  Maybe you should be up for revision.  Although me, I’ve been here far longer!  How many burning shit-stacks have fallen on top of you?”
“I don’t know,” responded Aulifg, “I just want to go to Heaven.”
“But—wha—I can’t believe my ears!  ‘Just want to go to Heaven,’ he says, as if this were a country club.  Well!  How many burning shit-sticks have fallen on top of you, eh?  That’s what counts, sonny.  Why, if it weren’t for the fact I keep losing count, I’d surely have saved up enough points to go to Heaven by now, when the revision officer comes around.”
“Points?  What do you mean ‘points?’” said another soul, who caught up with them just then.
“Haven’t you heard about the new points program?”
“Fool!  That’s just another joke they play on us—like ‘quitting time’!”
“I know, I know!  But just imagine if it were true!  Oh if only it were true!  How scintillating!  How—Arrrrrggggggghhhhhhhh!—”
The soul, at this point, was skewered through with hooks and pikes and tossed high up into the darkness.
“You know,” said another soul who drew near, scratching his chin contemplatively, “if it’s Heaven you’re going to, you’ll have to ask the big boss first.”
“The big boss?”
“Beelzebub.”
“Ah!” cried another fellow, “He’s horrible!  He’s got huge fangs!”
“Fangs is nothing!  He’s go these big arms that reach out and pop you like a berry!  Oh yes, it’s nasty like that.”
“Ha!  Berries is nothing!  His body’s covered with spikes.  His eyes have teeth which shoot out at you!”
“Bah!  Spikes and teeth is nothing!  He has horns on his head, and…and big spikes that…that spit flames!  And his eyes have these big teeth that…shoot out at you and it’s just awful, I tell you!  Awful!”
“What?” said Aulgif.
“Shush boy!”
“Fie on you!”
“Fie!”
“Who, the Devil?” said another soul who approached the group, “yes, I’ve gone and seen him.”  It was Ferdinand, who was respected in some circles for the D.Phil. work he had done at All Souls College in Oxford, before hurling himself from the spires before exam night.  “Now, the Devil, you see, what he does is he uses some kind of telekinesis, oh yes!  And…and your skin erupts all over in hives…indeed….  Fools, well!  All of the evils you can think of would not approach the evil of the prince of darkness.  Why, but, it does not even occur to me…but how to explain it to you simpletons!  Do you think that the immeasurable pain of the Devil’s methods can be comprehended by mere mortals?  No!  It must be some kind of, hm’mm, yes, a kind of telekinesis that causes the skin to erupt in hives, for, hm’mmm, indeed, only in that way would God’s holy magnificence be reflected…”
The other souls gathered closer and tried to understand what Ferdinand was saying, since Ferdinand had done some D.Phil work at All Souls College in Oxford and was capable of abstract thought, but suddenly Ferdinand fell silent and brought his finger to his lips.  Of course!  They had forgotten about the “no talking” rule!  Ooooohh they were in big trouble now, and their faces elongated into spectral frowns, and their eyes darted up into the darkness in anticipation of the white-hot skewers, barbs, tenterhooks, pikes, boiling pitch, skewers, barbs, pikes, and white-hot tenterhooks that would now come pouring down on their heads from the cavernous darkness.  And their eyes darted about the vaulted pitch, watching for where the white-hot skewers, tenterhooks, pikes, boiling pitch, skewers, flying steak knives, pikes, bits of hot charcoal, tenterhooks, and boiling pitch would come flailing down on them now at any moment like a bat out of Hell.  Oh yes, they were in for it now!  A terrible mess, big trouble, yes sir!—What with the boiling pitch, fire spits, bits of hot charcoal and steak knives, the pikes and tenterhooks, poison darts, tenterhooks, barbs, and so on, poison blow darts, for example, well, it was curtains for them!  And they huddled together and peered into the vaulted darkness.
Any moment now the fire-spits, pikes, skewers, poison blow-darts, flying steak knives, tenterhooks, fire-spits, and skewers, pots full of hot boiling water, and so forth, would come pouring down upon their heads like nobody’s business.


Aigluf, for his part, had already turned and headed toward the nadir of Hell where the Devil, or Beelzebub or Satan, was known to reside.  He had not known that you had to get Beelzebub’s permission first.  But the rules were the rules, and if that was what he had to do, then that was what he had to do.
When he reached the edge of the pit he peered into the swirling void.  How would he get to the bottom?  Should he cast himself over the edge?  “As shades we do not have a body, after all, and so such things won’t hurt the way they once did,” he reasoned to himself.
But it was not necessary.  The thunder of the vortex crashed louder and louder in his ears and he discerned his good friend Nimrod sprinting through the noxious purple fumes, his footsteps resounding and resounding like thunder.  The disconsolate giant then drew himself up, raised his horn to his lips, and blew two droning notes such as Agluf had never yet heard him play, at which a reeking blast of wind arose from the pit below, tangling Aigilf’s hair; and the massive winged beast, called Antaeus, rose from the abyss in response to Nimrod’s call.  His beating wings stirred all the filth of Hell into a vortex of reeking winds that bore bits of faetor and rotten flesh, but Agulf had grown used to all that by now, and with a running start he leapt over the void onto the winged beast’s back, and was borne down through the swirling vortex.







 There were very strict rules in Hell about where you had to be and when; and Aliuf did his best to follow along, but never got very good at it. Aliuf at the precipice shoals of damned souls!/Quitting time!/ He would not get the very deep and malicious cunning at play, and would set aside his shovel and go on long walks through Hell. He tried to follow along, but was never very good at it, particularly because he was never very good at staying in one place. There were very important rules about where you had to be at any given moment in Hell—although . The doctrine of natural places. Aigluf (the vapors of Hell always distorted his name) no longer remembered how long it had gone on like this; and he marveled that it would yet go on forever and ever. ...don’t you know your place! There was always heavy emphasis on place and a certain way of carrying yourself, rule following, but knowing the rules would often not apply…



Agiliuf era uno de los niños condenados al fuego eterno junto con sus compañeros en el cuarto malbowge del octavo círculo del Infierno por no haberse bautizado.
 donde la tarea era palear las heces candentes de las trincheras en enormes torres nítricas que luego les volvían a caer encima una y otra vez, enterrándolos a Afliuf y sus compañeros una y otra vez y para toda la eternidad.  Era raro encontrar un niño de diez anos condenado al fuego eterno, eso sí, pero solía ocurrir y los patrones demonios no les tenían ninguna misericordia por su condición de ser niño, ni les rebajaba el trabajo, sino que los perforaban y lastimaban con sus ganchos y dardos y picas con lengüetas con la misma intemperie desbordada con que lastimaban a sus compañeros adultos.  Por cuánto tiempo llevaba así Aigluf (los vapores alucinantes del Infierno se le distorsionaban su nombre) ya no tenía recuerdo alguno, tan solo sabía que le faltaba todavía una eternidad para recorrer.
	“¡Bueno muchachos!  ¡Lo dejamos allí por hoy!”
	“Dejarlo allí por hoy” era la hora en que los patrones demonios hacían esa broma nefasta a las almas condenadas de soltar una chifla y gritar que era “la hora libre”—¡malos!—y pues mientras se tiraban al piso atacados de la risa y los condenados también del desasosiego del terrible truco, Ailuf por su inocencia no entendía y pensaba que era en serio la hora libre y dejaba la pala a un lado y se iba a caminar por el Infierno.  Caminaba y se maravillaba por el inmenso cielo de tinieblas con sus nubes de corales negras—que de hecho fueron las almas condenados—¡arecifes y hojarascas de almas! ¡Bancos de alevines de almas nadando entre las nubes de corales negras de almas del cielo negro!
	De sus favoritos lugares de caminar era la orilla del río Styx, donde pudo espiar a los centauros que le fascinaban con sus ballestas y su manera tan educada de corregir a los condenados que hervían en el río—cuando éstos intentaban salir del río los centauros no los lastimaban ni con ganchos ni picas ni flechas; tan solo trotaban hasta donde el condenado salía del río y giraban sus cascos en el aire de buen humor, diciéndole, “¡Chu!  ¡Chu!  ¡Para abajo! ¡Sí señor!  ¡Colabórame con la bajada!”
	O más abajo le encantaba a Aluif acercar a donde el Minotauro celaba los portones de Dis1 con su enorme bastón.  Cuando ya estaba muy cerca Ailigf salía disparado de las sombras y corría entre las rodillas del Minotauro sin que lo pudiera coger.  Desde el otro lado de los portones miraba divertido al Minotauro pegando tarde al suelo con su bastón, tirándose al suelo y empezando con su pataleta.  Eso de correr entre las rodillas del Minotauro sin que lo pudiera coger era irresistible.  Todas las veces Aigliuf lo hacía.
Eso sí—en el transcurso de los caminatas de Agflif no faltaban las almas condenadas que salían de los huecos y grietas, como tantas arañas de sus nidos, equivocándolo por un visitante mortal de la faz de la tierra—pidiendole noticias de Florencia, Khanbaliq y de los otros lugares que habían sido sus hogares en la vida anterior.  Pero Ailglf no era mortal sino un alma condenado como ellos, y así se presentó:
	“¡Pero yo vivo acá como ustedes!  ¡Yo no soy mortal!”
	“¿Cómo así?” decían las almas condenadas.
	“¡Te lo juro!” decía Aluf.
	“¿Y cómo es que te vas encabritando para aquí y para allá como si fuera esto un club campestre?”
	“No sé.  Solo estoy caminando…”.
	“¡Creído!  ¡Se está burlando de nosotros!”
	“Pero no, ¡te lo juro!” decía Algif, “¡Yo soy condenado al fuego eterno igual como ustedes!”  Pero ya no le escuchaban.
	“¡Habrá el Demonio a pagar por tu insolencia!” decían, y:
	“¡Quiere burlar de nosotros!” y:
“¡Pues espera no más niño, que tu recibirás lo tuyo!”
Y nada que hacer.  Agliuf siguió caminando, maravillándose por la incredulidad implacable de las almas condenadas.
De vez en cuando Agliuf se encontraba con un señor viejo y muy barbudo.
“¿Quién eres tú?” preguntaba Afliug todas las veces pues casi nunca entendía la respuesta del señor:
“Soy un peripatético del limbo.”
“¿Limbo?”
“Arriba el primer círculo”.
	“Oh,” decía Aiuglf todas las veces, “¿Y quieres jugar?  ¿Quieres correr por las piernas del Minotauro sin que te pueda coger?  ¿Y has visto cómo los centauros nunca disparan sus ballestas y cómo a veces les gusta mirar al cielo con telescopios?”
“Mmmm sí, niño,” respondía el señor viejo y muy barbudo, dizque un peripatético, todas las veces, con aires de haber meditado sobre estos asuntos por la mayor parte de la eternidad.
“Y, y, ¿por qué…por qué piensas que es así…?” decía Algifu.
“Yo no creo que el Diablo existe, niño…”
De este índole, en fin, con una u otra variación, fue el trayecto de las conversaciones entre Afluig y el señor viejo y muy barbudo.
	Y sin variación alguna, las caminatas de Alfiug siempre terminaban en el precipicio del noveno círculo, el penúltimo antes del nadir absoluto del Infierno, donde vivía el gigante, su amigo Nimrod.  Desde el borde del precipicio Ailgf se le acercaba y de esa manera podía estar al nivel de ojos del gigante y disfrutar una larga conversación con él.  Y Nimrod por su parte estaba agradecido de tener a alguien que le entendiera cuando hablaba—siendo eso el castigo suyo, eso de que nadie lo entendía cuando hablaba—Pero de alguna manera Ailiuf pudo entenderlo y en sus conversaciones con el gigante se enteró que Nimrod fue castigado por haber multiplicado las lenguas en la tierra, que eso fue considerado como su pecado y fue condenado a que nadie le entendiera jamás cuando hablara, aunque de alguna manera Aluf sí podía hacerlo, quién sabrá cómo.
“Será porque cuando haya problemas de comunicación”, razonaba Aglif en su cabeza eterna de diez años, “es porque no se está escuchando de la manera que se tiene que hacerlo”.
“¡Brahr briahr bah-bi-bu!” decía Nimrod.
	“Claro”.
	Nadie más que él, le confesó Nimrod un día a Algif, le podía entender cuando hablaba.  Y que además de su condena de no poder comunicarse tenía que portar la trompeta inmensa colgada en su cuello, que le fue como el símbolo de su pena y de su soledad inarticulada e infinita.  Pero en el transcurso de la eternidad—le confesó a Aigliuf un día—Nimrod apreciaba cada vez más su trompeta de otra manera, se le ocurrían otros significados que pudiera tener ese supuesto símbolo de su pena eterna.
	“¿Y esa trompeta colgada en tu cuello?  ¿Para qué es eso?” preguntaba Aglif, por ejemplo.
“Briiii-brahr bríbu.  ¡Brarh brahr bri-bri-breeauah!”
“¿Oh?  ¿Qué tipo de ocasiones especiales?”
Sin embargo, siempre llegaba el momento en que los demonios sin nada que hacer se llegaron a burlar de Nimrod, pues fue de las almas condenadas más fáciles de burlarse en todo el infierno.
“¡Bla!  ¡Bla!  ¡Bla!  ¡Mírame, mírame!  ¡Yo soy Nimrod y no sé hablar!” decían los demonios, o:
“¡Bli-bli!  ¡Bla-bla!  ¡Mírame que yo soy Nimrod, soy un bobo y no puedo hablar normal!” decían.
O también decían, en su tono más sarcástico:
“¡Mírame que yo no sé hablar sino tan solo tocar mi trompeta!”
Y como si esto fuera poco y cuando Nimrod ya moría de la pena y sacudía su cabeza de lado a lado, los demonios le lanzaban dardos, ganchos, tritones con lengüetas—en fin todo los instrumentos de su oficio—y éstos resbalaban contra el pecho enorme de Nimrod y caían al suelo no más como si fueran unos guijarros arrojados contra una montaña, pues el gigante era—¡pues era gigantesco!—y al ver que sus ganchos y dardos caían así no mas, los demonios se ponían aún más furiosos:
“¡Mírame mírame!  ¡Yo soy Nimrod no sé hablar!”
“¡No sé nada soy un bobo!  ¡Solo sé tocar mi trompeta!”
“¡Tócala pues!  ¡Tócala pues!”
A través de sus conversaciones con Agulf, Nimrod había empezado a ver su trompeta de otra manera, no tanto como un símbolo de su condena sino como una vía de comunicación trascendental.  Pero todavía era muy nascente, muy frágil su confianza, así que esto de que los demonios lo burlaban de tal manera le fue insoportable.  Cubría sus oídos y sacudía su cabeza.
“¡Tócala pues!”
Y no pudo más.  Agarró la trompeta y sopló una nota larga y lúgubre, de aquellas que solía sonar y resonar en todos los nichos y huecos del Infierno:

¡Baaaaaaaaaaaaaaauuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu!


*	*	*

“¿Qué noticias de Florencia?  ¡Ah!  ¡Eres tú otra vez!  ¡Niño travieso!  ¡Qué crees pues, que esto es un club campestre o qué o qué!”
Al regresar otra vez al cuarto malbowge del octavo círculo donde habitaba, Ailiuf trataba de describirles a sus compañeros adultos las maravillas que había visto en sus caminatas, pero nunca le creyeron y seguían paleando el estiércol en las inmensas torres nítricas aunque ya los patrones demonios habían dicho que era la hora libre.
	“¡Cállate niño! que esto es el Infierno con ‘i’ latín mayor”, decían, como si fueran los dueños de la verdad.
“Mira niño, aquí estamos en el Infierno, todo eso de salir a caminar por donde uno quiere, ¡imposible!”
“¡Esto no es un club campestre, niño!  ¡Quién te crees para irte—” empezaba otro, pero fue aplastado por una inmensa torre de mierda antes de poder terminar.
	Y nada que hacer.  Agliuf tomaba su palo y se refugiaba en la tarea, asombrado por la incredulidad implacable de las almas condenadas.

*	*	*

Un día Agliuf decidió irse para el Cielo.
	“¡Adiós amigos!” les decía a sus compañeros en el malbowge cuando ya estaba parado en la cresta de la trinchera, despidiéndoles con la mano, “¡Adiós!”
	“¿Cómo así que ‘adios amigos’?  ¿A dónde crees que vas niño?”
	“¡Me voy para el Cielo!”
	Las condenadas no pudieron contener su risa.  Se tiraron sobre el suelo matados por la inocencia de Agliuf y las torres candentes de mierda se les cayeron encima.
	“¡Dizque va pa’l Cielo, el pobre iluso!  ¡Ja!  ¡Ja!  ¡JaAAAAAA!—” dijo uno justo antes de ser aplastado.
	“Adios amigos…” dijo Agiuf una vez más y empezó a caminar para arriba.
	Viendo que era en serio, las otras condenadas dejaron de reír y se levantaron del suelo, rasgando sus mentones.
“Oye niño,” dijo uno, “¿Ya sacaste el permiso?”
	“¿Permiso?” replicó Aigluf, asombrado, “¿Cuál permiso?”
	“Pues mira, niño, para hacer cualquier cosa tienes que pedir permiso del Patrón”.
	“¿El Patrón?”
	“Digo, Lucifer”.
	“¡Uyyyyyy!” decían los otros compañeros cuando escucharon mencionar el nombre del Diablo, “Él es supremamente terrible.  ¡Él te agarra y te exprime hasta que te explotas como una uchuva!”
	“¡Je!  ¡Uchuvas no son nada!” alzó otro, “Ese man tiene espinas por todos lados, parece un cactus—”
“¿Un cactus?”
“¡Pero con dientes!  Sí, ¡un cactus con dientes!  Y, y, ¡los dientes disparan!—”
	“¡Imbéciles!” increpó un tercero, “¡Espinas y dientes no son nada!”
	Era Ferdinand que hablaba y todos callaron porque sabían que él era capaz del pensamiento abstracto, pues él estudiaba para un DPhil en Teología en el All Souls College de Oxford antes de tirarse de las cúpulas en la víspera del examen final, así que fue el mas inteligente de la trinchera de mierda y todos le tenían mucho respecto.
“¿Ustedes creen,” continuaba Ferdinand, “que Dios no tuviera mas creatividad que un cactus y una uchuva?  ¡Qué poca fe la de ustedes!”
“Pero, Doctor”, lanzó un compañero, “hablamos es del Diablo no de Dios”.
“¡A eso voy, imbécil!  Es que el Diablo es la creación de Dios y como tal es un reflejo de su poder asombroso.  No—es que ‘¡uchuvas!’—el Diablo tiene que usar es una especie de…de…de telekinesis para atormentar a sus víctimas, mmmm ¡lógico! una telepatía digna del genio de Dios—que alcanza a destruir, a volver pedazos a cualquier distancia, de una perversidad total, de una malevolencia indescifrable…”
“¡Ah!  ¡Pues claro!” decían los compañeros.
“¡Qué tontos nosotros!”
	“¡Cállense!” gritó Ferdinand, “¡La regla de ‘No Hablar’!”
	“¡Carajo!  ¡Se nos olvidaron!”
	“¡Cállense todos y ojala no se hayan dado cuenta!”
	(“No Hablar” era una de las reglas del Infierno, pero en el Infierno uno no sabía en que momentos las reglas las iban a hacer cumplir y en que momentos, a raíz de un engaño siniestro, las iban a ignorar.  Todos miraban arriba a las tinieblas temblando del miedo de las picas, dardos, lanzas con lengüetas y brasas ardientes que sin duda les iban a caer encima…
…Pues en contados segundos se les iban a caer encima las brasas ardientes, las picas, espadas, ganchos, lanzas, tritones, ollas de agua herviente, pedazos de posillos quebrados, cuchillos de mesa volantes con lengüetas, las ollas llenas de agua herviente o al punto de hervir, los dardos, ganchos de armario, pedazos de briquetas al rojo vivo, duchadas de agua frío, de acuerdo con el infinito genio y poder de Dios, y todos miraban arriba muy asustados pues ya de un momento a otro iban a estar muy arrepentidos….)
Algiuf, por su parte, ya había comenzado su descenso hacia el nadir del Infierno para pedir permiso para ir al Cielo.  No sabía de la regla de que tenía que pedir permiso del Diablo para subir al Cielo, pero las reglas fueron las reglas, y si fuese eso lo que tenía que hacer para subir al Cielo, pues entonces fue eso lo que tenía que hacer—y nada que hacer.
“¿Cómo voy a llegar al fondo?” pensó Aigliuf cuando llegaba al precipicio del noveno círculo, “Será tirarme.  Supongo que no me dolerá tanto como cuando era de carne y hueso”.
	Pero no le hizo falta tirarse al abismo, pues en ese momento escuchó unas pisadas fuertes y vio una inmensa figura partiendo las tinieblas:
	“¡Nimrod!” gritó Aliuf.

¡Baaaaaaaaaaaaaaauuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu!

Al sonar y resonar la nota de la trompeta de Nimrod, subió del abismo el murciélago gigante Antaeus2 batiendo sus enormes alas y levantando unos tremendos vórtices de nieve, mierda, carne putrefacto—en fin, todo la inmundicia del Infierno—por la cual travesó la sonrisa de Ailuf y el saludo de mano en alto a su amigo Nimrod.  Saltó en la espalda del monstruo y se agarró bien de las mechas hediondas de su pellejo mientras volteó en un gran espiral hasta llegar al fondo del abismo.
	Agliuf bajó del monstruo y prendió la caminata sobre el hielo amarillo del lago Cocataeus hacia el nadir absoluto del Infierno.  Solo había una leve brisa que apenas mecía a los bancos de neblina color de cadáver.
“¿Qué…noticias…de Florencia?” agitaban los condenados, congelados hasta sus mentones en el hielo amarrillo, sin importarles que partían su piel y mandíbulas por hacer su pregunta.
	Ya había caminado mucho cuando Aluf distinguía algo entre la neblina.
“Esto será Lucifer,” pensó.
	Al acercarse más vio que fueron dos figuras.
“¡Dos Diablos!” pensó, “¡Ay!  ¡Es mucho peor de lo que habíamos pensado!  ¡Ni siquiera Ferdinand pudo imaginarlo!”
Pero no.  No, al acercarse más a las dos figuras vio que no fueron formas de Diablos sino de personas, y al llegar a donde estaban paradas se veía que eran un hombre y una mujer.
“Oh”, dijo Aliuf cuando ya estaba parado ante ellos, “¿Quiénes son ustedes?”
“Yo soy Eva”.
“Yo soy Adán”.
“Oh”, dijo Agif.
“¿Te podemos ayudar en algo, muchacho?” dijo Adán.
“Necesito hablar con Lucifer”.
“Se fue”.
“¿Se fue?”
“Hace rato, ¿cierto Eva?”
“Ni tanto”.
“Oh”, dijo Algf.
“Solía masticarnos en su boca”, dijo Adán, “pues eso era nuestro castigo—”
“Pero un día nos sacó de su jeta hediondo y nos dejó acá plantados”, dijo Eva, cortándole la palabra a Adán.
“¿Sabes qué mi corazón?” dijo Adán con aspereza, “Sería chévere que no me interrumpieras cada vez que estoy hablando”.
“Oh”, dijo Agliuf, “y ¿a dónde fue Lucifer?”
“No sabemos—”
“Tenía cara de aburrido—”.
“Como de deprimido”.
“Dios Santo Eva, ¿vas a empezar?”
“Eres tú que empieza cara de pez”.
“Oh”, dijo Ailif.
“¿Por qué lo necesitabas?”, siguió Adán.
“A pedirle permiso para ir al Cielo”.
“Tú no necesitas permiso para eso”, dijo Eva.
“Oh”, dijo Agiliuf, “Entonces voy para el Cielo.”  Y volvió a prender el camino para las orillas del lago congelado.  Después de caminar unos pasos volvió a mirarlos.
“¿Quieren ir conmigo?” dijo.
“¡Ay, qué ternura de niño!” exclamó Eva.
“Cómo son de inocente los niños,” dijo Adán, como divertido, “Gracias muchachito, pero Lucifer pueda volver en cualquier momento y no lo vería bien si no estuviéramos, me entiendes…”
“Oh”, dijo Aglif.
Dio la vuelta y siguió su camino, cruzando el lago congelado otra vez.  Subió a las mechas hediondas del monstruo Antaeus y éste batió sus alas una vez más levantando los vortices de mierda y carne podrida y dando grandes espirales hasta llegar al borde del precipicio del noveno círculo.  Allí Agiliuf miró a su gran amigo Nimrod por ultima vez.
“¡Adiós, amigo!” dijo Agliuf, despidiéndole con la mano en alto.
“¡Brah-bri-braaaaah!” dijo Nimrod, y plantó su trompeta en los labios y sopló una nota triunfante de aquellas que antes no se escuchaba nunca y que ya sonaba y resonaba en todos los nichos y huecos del Infierno:

¡Baaaaaaaaaaaaaaauuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu!

Y la reverberación de la trompeta de Nimrod le dio alas a Agiliuf, lo mandó a volar, ya Algiuf sintió sus manos y pies saliendo del suelo y las rocas espinosas del Infierno.
Ya volaba sobre los malbowges del octavo círculo y vio a sus compañeros una vez más camellando entre las torres de heces, que ya no se veían tan inmensas vistas desde tan alto.
“¡Adiós amigos!” les decía el muchacho.
Y éstos agitando sus puños y gritando:
	“¡Cuándo vas a aprender, niño!  ¡Esto es el Infierno con ‘i’ latín mayúscula!  ¡Nada de eso de volar al Cielo!”
	Se le aguaron los ojos a Ailgf de todas maneras, pues aunque sus amigos nunca le mostraban mucho cariño fueron sus amigos al fin y al cabo y Ailglf no pudo evitar que se le subiera una lágrima.  En el otro instante ya desaparecieron todos debajo las nubes de corales negras.
	Mas arriba pasó sobre los portones de Dis y el minotauro, que se tiró sobre el suelo de la rabia y empezó con su pataleta de siempre.
Y mas arriba aún pasó sobre el río Styx y los centauros, quienes lo miraban mediante unos telescopios montados en la orilla del río y maravillaban su vuelo.
Y más arriba: vio al peripatético meditando en el limbo.
“¡Ya voy para el Cielo!” Ailguf le gritó.
“¡Fascinante propuesta!” le respondió el señor viejo y muy barbudo.
“¿No quieres venir?”
“¡Fascinante propuesta!” dijo el peripatético otra vez, saludándole no más con su mano en alto.
Y mas arriba aún…
Y mas arriba aún…
Ya todo desaparecía debajo la cortina de corales negras de alevines de almas condenadas.  Ya no se veía más de la miseria del Infierno.  Desde arriba unos rayos de luz empezaron a picar los ojos malacostumbrados a la luz de Agliuf como plumas.  Agliuf parpadeó, sonrió, no pudo contener su risa por las cosquillas que le daban los rayos en sus ojos.  Se veía llanos, ríos, árboles, cafetales, nubes, cocales, guaduales, techos—todo de colores cuyos nombres él casi no acordaba—ve… verd… ¿verde? Nnadanra…¡naranja!—Y subió y subió hasta llegar al Cielo, como había decidido hacer.
Y en el Cielo el primero en darle la bienvenida fue un arcángel de alas enormes y llenas de luz, que era Lucifer.
Y ¿cómo era el Cielo?  Pues cada lector tendrá que averiguarlo por su propia cuenta, pero Agiliuf, pues en la mañana, en las horas de marea baja, salía con su papá sobre los bancos del estuario a arrastrar las ostras de las corales negras.  No se hizo preguntas difíciles sobre las muchas formas que pueda tener el Cielo ni de si cada uno escogía o no la forma del Cielo o del Infierno que le servía, sino que tan solo alzaba sus manos a tocar la rueca de su madre y los patrones que tejaba en la tela de lino bañada en la luz de atardecer, pues a la hora de la verdad Agiliuf no pudo distinguir el Cielo de cómo había sido la vida.  Razonaba en su cabeza eterna de diez años que el Cielo era distinto de la vida porque el Cielo era eterno, pero igual le parecía que no era la medida del tiempo del uno o el otro lo que importaba sino la intemporalidad de ambos.  De todas maneras siempre que llegaba allí en sus pensamientos perdía el hilo y salía a correr por los bancos de lodo de marea baja.  Eso era el Cielo, y Agiliuf ya no tenía recuerdo alguno de cuanto tiempo llevaba así, tan solo sabía que le quedaba todavía una eternidad para recorrer.
	“La moral de la historia”, dijo Agiliuf a su papá un día cuando ya lo tenía todo organizado en su cabeza, “es que la vida es muy corta, y la eternidad aún más”.


Aliuf returned to the winged beast Antaeus, which bore him back up to the edge of the tenth malbowge of the eight circle.  Agulf waved goodbye to Nimrod and started upward on his walk to Heaven.  Nimrod took his horn and blew a long, triumphant note such as had never been heard in Hell, and the sound bore Alguf up through the reeking vapors; Agiluf’s hands and feet had left the rocks, and he was flying upward, upward, through the poisonous fogs.  And just before they disappeared beneath the poisonous fumes, Agiluf called down to his damned companions, inviting them to come along too; but again they responded in their usual manner, shaking their fists indignantly in the air, and saying, “You don’t seem to understand that this is Hell!  Capital ‘H,’ sonny!”
He flew over the Styx where the centaurs marveled at his flight and looked at him through telescopes, and all the monsters and gatekeepers—the Minotaur and the Erinyes, Minos and Charon—were vexed by his passage and scratched their chins.  They howled out in indignation, and the howls bore Aigilf higher and higher through the vapors of Hell, through the roofs of the caverns, through the open sky, and upward and upward to Heaven, as he had decided.
And what was Heaven like?  Well, that’s something that each of you will have to go and experience for yourself.  As for Agliuf, in the morning, when the tide went out, he left with his father to pull oysters from the shoals.  He did not wonder about the many forms of Heaven or speculate that each one perceived the Heaven that befits them.  He reached out and held the flax cloth between his hands, his hands reached out and grasped his mother’s spindles and distaff; his fingers traced the patterns of cloth.  Indeed, Agiluf could not distinguish it too much from life.  He knew that Heaven was different because it was longer than life, but if it was timelessness, and not time, that counted, then there was really no way to distinguish it from the way life had been.  And at this point Aigiliuf would forget what he had been trying to figure out and sprint off across the tidal flats, the two figures of mother and father in the distance.  And like this it went on for a long time—just how long Agiluf did not know—and was yet to go on forever more.
“The moral of the story,” said Agliuf to his father one day, “is that life is short, and eternity even shorter.”
