Saturno Malacoda

We stood rigid and taciturn as chesspieces in the checkered raiment of Saturno’s salon, as we always did in our literary tertulias. Saturno, as a rule, did not join us, but was seated in his apartments upstairs, hands clasped together as though in prayer, gazing up through the legendary smokiness that always filled his eyes. Julio, Ernesto, and the others were downstairs, their gazes transfixed on their own sort of smoky nothingness; and I, as always, stood off to one side of the intellectual hocus pocus, contemplating the impenetrable mood of the writers—which earlier that day I had at last deciphered. That is to say, it dawned on me that Saturno and Julio had kept me around the literary salon not because I was an up and coming minor poet and prospective heir to their literary legacy, but rather because the dismantling of Saturno’s financial labyrinth had become a priority of the Soviet government; and because Julio was the clandestine agent assigned with this task.  I felt that I might swoon under the sudden pang of foreknowledge, and took my hat to leave.
	“Where is the minor poet going?” asked Julio in his sardonic tone, discerning my every move without looking up from his nothingness.
	“To get married and start a family,” I responded, “In fact, I strongly advise you all to do the same.”
	With this, [I had broken the spell,] the masks fell from their faces...and in the half light of the salon, or perhaps by the light of the Promethean flicker in my eyes, you could see their faces were blanched. I paused to savor this perfect little moment in world history that I had unwittingly created...Perhaps I am over-infatuated with the memory.
Only rude Ernesto saw fit to dishonor the moment with his miserable sophistry.
	“John the Apostle got it wrong. The feminine principle is founded upon the logos, while the masculine—and by masculine I mean the writer—is founded upon silence…” Etc., etc., blah blah blah.
	“The feminine principle is founded upon the conch shell,” barked Julio, in his turn, but could muster no further response, and collapsed into his chair.

I had taken the idea for this devastating response from a conversation I had had just hours earlier with one of Saturno’s business associates in the steel antechamber of the heliport on YCF’s  “Minotaur”—the largest offshore drilling platform in the world, at the time—the crescendoing whine of the Mercedes turboprop gestating for takeoff just meters away.
	“Minor poet,” I corrected him, since he had asked if I were a writer, that is to say, a writer on the same footing as Julio and Saturno, “I still publish under a pseudonym.”
	“And what is your pseudonym, if I may ask?”
	“Bazarov.”
	Yes, Bazarov, the nihilist character from Turgenev’s novel Fathers and Sons. While I may confess without arrogance that, from an early age, I have always had a certain innate talent for intellectual vanity, the credit for this degree of conceit must go to my father, Saturno, who, in a stroke of genius, sent me to a university in the United States to put the finishing touches on his protege. U.S. universities were then, of course, as now, the renowned incubators par excellence of the great diplomatic and sociopathic minds of the twentieth century. (Although I could never hope to attain the level of conceit of my American colleague Roger, who outclassed me at every turn, calling himself at times Lorenzo, or Pericles, or Cleisthenes, depending upon his level of penetration of the political science textbooks he was studying. Yes, why it’s been ages since I’ve thought of Roger! I feel the sting of envy as though it were yesterday. But I suppose some of us must be the invisible hand, and others the smiling face, in this capitalist inframundo we call the “global village”. Ah, but how we would pass our Sundays in the campus literary house, declaiming verse from Hyperion and The Albatross! We graduated from that place convinced of our world-historical importance—although Roger, of course, more successfully than I. The gringos, after all, have a penchant, which the rest of us can never hope to match, for believing they are the saviors of the world. Roger left to fill the post his father had set aside for him at the embassy in Warsaw (his father being the ambassador to the Weimar Republic, at the time, in addition to being a friend to Lloyd George and Saturno, my father.), while I returned to Buenos Aires to take my place as another unwitting shadow in Saturno’s financial labyrinth.)
	(Although, to be sure, now I am making up for lost time by auditing the Bourgeois Endgames course offered at the University of Buenos Aires, in which Saturno’s ouevre, not surprisingly, figures abundantly.)
	“Hmmm, worrisome!” the business associate had responded in the steel antechamber of the Minotaur’s helipad, meanwhile, now forced to shout over the crescendoing whine of the turboprop engine, “The Malacoda family will not survive another generation of writers!” And that was not all:
	“What’s wrong with you writers? Why don’t you ever settle down and start a family like the rest of us?”
There is no answer to a question like this, of course. One merely smiles and turns to look out the oval window of the Mercedes turboprop, into the [receding vortex] wine dark vortex of waves and [jets] sea spray below; and lets the silence do the talking. But it is even more than that. The businessman’s enigmatic proposition had the effect of a Japanese koan, designed to kick one’s mundane train of thought up to a plane of startling insight, where, in a flash, [the vain web of contradictions in which one has subconsciously trapped and devoured oneself unravels; and one attains satori. Yes, in precisely this way,] I at last saw through the airy, vexatious nothingness of Saturno’s literary salon, and the never-ending errands to the Bursar, or out to the Minotaur to chit-chat with the chief engineer, and[or] the supposedly literary discussions with Julio at Funes’ cafe afterwards, when Julio would ask about my errands to the Bursar and the Minotaur and about the nature of my conversations with the chief engineer, and the C-4 charges, etc., yes, in a flash it was all abundantly clear: Julio and Saturno had kept me around all this time not, after all, because I was an up and coming minor poet and future heir to Saturno’s literary legacy, as I had been so meticulously trained to believe in my bourgeois finishing school [carefully curated], but rather because the dismantling of Saturno’s financial empire….
Mercifully, the C-4 charges detonated in the next instant, sparing me from having to voice some venal non-answer to the businessman’s koan; and I could focus my attention through the passenger window on the twisted, heaving bulwark of the Minotaur platform—the largest of its kind at that moment in history—as it slipped beneath the waves, ejecting tall white jets of sea spume in one last petulant protest.

*	*	*

Or that is the gist of it, anyway, notwithstanding one or two minor details painted in with, perhaps, an overzealous hand. It is as well as I can recall so many years afterwards, the people and events in question having [receded] drifted so far out of focus, and memory having waxed permissive in equal measure. I am dead, after all. I merely describe what is permitted me from my vantagepoint (seated at my habitual table in Funes’ café). And right now, I am permitted the vision of Funes approaching my table, the same white tea towel draped over his left forearm now yellow with age, serving my cafe latte just as he did forty-seven years ago—although his trembling hands make quite a racket now with the spoon and saucer; and the the black lapels of his burgundy smoking jacket exhale a whiff of naphthalene, mixed in with the odor of pomade and musk, when he inclines his torso to serve the latte, that they did not used to. And the portraits of Diego Rivera, Leon Trotsky, and Vladimir Mayakovsky  on the walls over my head have been replaced by portraits of Carlos Gardel and Eva Peron. But otherwise everything is the same as it was forty-seven years ago.
	And there is a color TV that is unceremoniously lashed to the rusting iron framework of the burgundy awning of Funes’ café; and on the screen of the color TV the image of the mangled bulwark of the Minotaur, listing and sinking into the Atlantic Ocean, spewing tall white jets of sea spume, that was not there before. But otherwise everything is the same as it was fory-seven years ago.
	Or not Mayakovsky, but rather Grigory Zinoviev, or was it Maxim Gorky? Could not have been Mayakovsky as news of Mayakovsky did not reach us here in Buenos Aires until long after it mattered—i.e. after the twentieth congress, after they put up the portraits of Gardel and Peron, and after people had forgotten that other portraits had once occupied the spots occupied by Gardel and Peron.
	Ah, now they are saying on the TV that it is not the Minotaur oil platform, but rather a British ship that our boys sank just yesterday east of las Malvinas (vamos patria!). Well, have your pick: YCF Minotaur oil rig or British type 42 guided missle destroyer. The two things are without a doubt archetypally the same. The people communicating this information on the TV look respectable enough, and assure me they will keep me posted as the story develops—which is very considerate of them.
	Yes, it was across this very table in Funes’ café that Julio slid, under one hand, the Party card and revolver, inviting me into the fold; and where I denied him the satisfaction. His gesture heroic. His fatal mistake lay in imagining that there had been some earnest yearning for meaning behind the fascade of conceited minor poet [my motives noble but misguided], and that I would welcome the opportunity to escape the labyrinth. But Saturno’s master stroke of sending me to bourgeois finishing school in the U.S. had innoculated me from such … in a way that a mind like Julio’s could never fathom. A mind like Julio’s, whose every thought girded by some epoch-making, emancipatory Project, and thereby perpetually in conversation with every other important thought in history, could not hope to fathom the Byzantine smallness at my core, that Saturno had so  meticulously curated. He could never have fathomed that we are trapped in our labyrinths not because we cannot get out, but by choice, and was not impressed but rather offended by his heroic offer to escape the labyrinth, and [petty enough] eager to use it to ruin him. I still see before me the uncharacteristic look of vertigo in his eyes when he understood that he had been outmaneuvered by Saturno. Without having released the Party card and revolver, he slid them back to his side of the table, and returned them to their respective vest pockets. He stood and regarded me one last time [sideways glance], his eyes [narrowing] recovering their habitual hawkish aspect, and departed the café. And the game was afoot.
[He did not have to offer me this opportunity, after all.  I had served my purpose as far as the Soviet Government was concerned, and was now expendable.  But here it was that Saturno’s brilliant ploy of sending me to an American university finally paid off.  For even as I understood that Julio was offering me an invaluable opportunity, I had taken enough courses in English Romanticism to see nothing of the broader struggle that was at stake, to feel only the joy of taking this invaluable opportunity to lift myself up out of the malaise of false convictions and minor poet vainglory, to trade in the pretend existence of the bourgeoisie, as it were, for a real life—and using it to ruin him instead.]
	I went directly to Saturno. He was finishing up a telephone conversation when I found him in his apartments above the empty salon. Hanging up the phone, he turned towards me and cut me off before I could tattle on Julio:
	“Hijo, everything is arranged. There is no time to waste. Go to the Bursar and sell the YCF shares immediately. At this hour tomorrow, the Minotaur will lie on the bottom of the sea.”
	I could not respond….
	“But father, it is already done.”
	“How so? What do you mean, exactly?”
	“Julio beat you by one day, padre. The Minotaur lies on the seafloor even as we speak.”
	His eyes filled with horror as the ...swooning beneath the image of the strewn jets of sea foam.
	“And so, the shares?”
	I receded into the eye wall of the vortex that presently engulfed him…
...two shots in the distance...
	It was Saturno. He had been looking for me all night.
	“The shares, my boy? ”
	One of the lamps turned off, extinguishing one of his many shadows…
	Thoroughly disappointed…returned to the starting point of the game, this table at Fune’s café. “old sport!” with the same conceited smile that he would later tell the press in Jakarta...
	Now they are saying that it was an exocet air-to-ship missile fired by one of our boys from a Super-Etenard fighter bomber…and that it was not the Minotaur, but the H.M.S. Sheffield… They are showing archival footage of a ship heaving and sinking beneath the waves...archetypally the same... Even these are not images of the actual sinking of the H.M.S. Sheffield, but rather archival footage of exocet missiles sinking ships. There was no camera crew present when the actual events unfolded. We must take on faith that these images are an accurate representation of the reported event, which no one who survived the event saw firsthand. The archetypal content, then, is no different from the sinking of the Minotaur.

 
	
	The fundamental semiotic error—and triumph—upon which the bourgeois reality is constructed.
[things are identical because of their character of being different. At a sort of typological level, that is to say, in the stamp collecting, potato counting, taxonomic epistemology of the bourgeoisie, two things that are different, even things that are fundamentally the opposite of one another—like good and evil, or east and west—are in fact the same be virtue of their both falling into the category of being different. And they are more exactly the same, in the alienated potato counting sense, in the measure that they are different in their real, sensuously manifest sense.]


“Gracias, Funes.”
“Con el mayor gusto, Bazarov.”
He draws himself up and shuffles off beneath the portraits of Carlos Gardel and Eva Peron that replaced, sometime around 1940, the portraits of Trotsky and Mayakovsky.
Good, poor Funes. He has done his best to keep up with the times, replacing as he did the portraits of Mayakovsky and Trotsky with portraits of Eva Peron and Carlos Gardel, and setting up a color TV beneath the burgundy awning of his café at some point during the 1970s.  But there is a certain lack of panache in the way good Funes lashed it up there on rusting awning frame.  I can tell he did not do it in a trendy way that will attract the new sort of people who live in Buenos Aires.



Yes of course, Funes’ Café,   There on the wall where the portraits of Eva Peron and Carlos Gardel are, used to hang the portraits of Mayakovsky and Trotsky.  And these empty booths—they used to resound with the ebullient arguments of students, poets, artists, journalists, futurists, expressionists, vorticists, social realists, cubists, imagists, and the like, their fists resounding against the table tops as they argued over the meaning of Stalin’s last Mayday speech, or the meaning of the crash of ’29, or the meaning of Spanish Front, or the meaning of the bullet hole in Mayakovsky’s heart.
But that was a long time ago, of course.  It only takes one glance up Transversal 32 to dispel the old airs, where one catches a glimpse of the young stockbrokers drinking martinis on the colonnaded patios of Avenue La Rivadavia, their wives a short distance away discussing shoes over café lattes.  I can read the bags at their feet from here: “Bloomingdales,” “Marks and Spencer,” “Saks,” and so on.











El impacto enigmático de la pregunta del socio fue tanto que me llevó al nivel de perspicacia necesario, casi igual como un koán del budismo zen, y entendí por primera vez por qué los escritores del círculo SUD me habían dejado acudir tanto a sus reuniones literarias, de por qué el acercamiento tan cálido de Julio—nuestras conversaciones supuestamente “literarias” en el Café Funes—de por qué los arreglos con el ingeniero jefe de la plataforma—quien era infiltrado—de por qué las cargas explosivas, et cetera.  No era porque yo fuese la próxima gran cosa de SUD, sino porque…
“Julio quiere hundir la plataforma.”
“¿Eh?” dijo el socio, pues mi pensamiento había salido en voz alta.
Al otro instante estallaron las cargas explosivas, afortunadamente, salvándome de tener que inventar una respuesta a su koán.

Pero “el significativo de dos cosas que sean distintas en su esencia, precisamente por ser distintas en su esencia, resulta ser equivalente en su calidad semiótica: pues la calidad semiótica de ambas es de no ser igual al otro,” decía el profesor ayer en el seminario sobre la oeuvre de Saturno, mi padre, del módulo “Juegos Finales de la Literatura Burguesa,” del programa de Literatura Soviética en que estoy inscrito, en la Universidad Pública Lemontov, en Moscú.


(Ahora estoy recuperando el tiempo perdido, eso sí, en la Universidad Pública Lemontov en Moscow, donde estoy cursando el módulo “Juegos Finales de la Literatura Burguesa” del programa de Literatura Soviética.  De hecho, la ouevre de Saturno figura mucho en ese módulo.)
“Muy preocupante, joven,” decía el socio de Saturno allí en la antesala del helipuerto de la plataforma petrolera, con el chillido de las turbinas de fondo, “¿Qué les pasa?”
	“¿Perdón?”
	“¿Qué les pasa?”
	“¿A quiénes?”
	“A ustedes.”
	“¿A nosotros quiénes?”
“Ustedes escritores.  ¿Por qué no se casan?  ¿Por qué no tengan hijos?  La familia Malacoda no sobrevivirá otra generación de escritores, sabes.”
El impacto enigmático de la pregunta del socio fue tanto que me llevó al nivel de perspicacia necesario, casi igual como un koán del budismo zen, y entendí por primera vez por qué los escritores del círculo SUD me habían dejado acudir tanto a sus reuniones literarias, de por qué el acercamiento tan cálido de Julio—nuestras conversaciones supuestamente “literarias” en el Café Funes—de por qué los arreglos con el ingeniero jefe de la plataforma—quien era infiltrado—de por qué las cargas explosivas, et cetera.  No era porque yo fuese la próxima gran cosa de SUD, sino porque…
“Julio quiere hundir la plataforma.”
“¿Eh?” dijo el socio, pues mi pensamiento había salido en voz alta.
Al otro instante estallaron las cargas explosivas, afortunadamente, salvándome de tener que inventar una respuesta a su koán.



To be sure, images like these—images of fighter-bombers and sinking ships—are almost certainly meant to symbolize a particular reality or facet of reality—but I think it is fair to say that they are almost just as certainly not that reality in itself, and are not connected to any particular person’s predicament at any given place and time in the world, ever.









I had gotten the idea for my devastating remark the previous day—or was it the following day? (it is no longer important)—when I was seated in the steel anteroom to the helipad on the Minotaur oil platform off the coast of Stanley, accompanied by one of Saturno’s German business associates, waiting for the Mercedes turboprop to gestate and lift us back to shore (because of certain connections of Saturno’s with the Wehrmacht he had access to the latest marvels of German engineering, many of which were still state secrets at that time).  I don’t remember the businessman’s name, but his words will always remain vivid in my mind.  As the low growl of the engine slowly crescendoed into a high piercing whine, he said to me, “I suppose you are a writer too, then, aren’t you?”
“Yes I’m a writer, with SUR,” I replied to the businessman—without the slightest tone of irony—as the rotors of the Mercedes were heard to approach in the distance.
“Worrisome,” replied the business partner, “why don’t you writers ever get married, start a family?  The Malacoda family won’t survive another generation of writers, you know.”


the credit for that must go to Saturno, who had the brilliant idea of sending me to a university in the United States of America, which is what you do to reduce a man to zero, or to produce agreeable gentlemen like Roger versed in bourgeois-psychotic venality (poshlust, Gogol would say).
It was there at the American university that I met Roger—during our freshman year.  His father was a close friend of Lloyd George, Saturno, and other notables, had served as ambassador to Austria, the Weimar Republic, Poland, and so on.  We became fast friends, Roger and I, spending our Sundays after mass holed up in the campus’ Literary House, calling each other “sport,” “bean,” and so on, reciting Hyperion and The Albatross from memory—alongside the half-forged slag of our own minor poetry, of course—yes, just the thing to reduce a man to zero!
Now I am making up for lost time, of course, by having enrolled in the Soviet Literature program at Lemontov University in Moscow.
For the bourgeoisie, two things are not alike because of their outward parity, but because of their increasing marginal disparity.  The more unalike two things are, therefore, for the bourgeoisie, the more they are essentially alike—the more unified they are in their essence of being unalike.  The more enslaved and alienated we are by the exigencies of capitalist existence, the more the bourgeoisie will claim that we are free.  The more the world falls beneath the boot of fascist dictators working for corporate interests, the more they will extol the spread of democracy.  And so, the images are not, merely by their phenomenological un-alikeness to my situation, related to my current disorientation.
Or that is how the professor’s words went, at any rate, during the lectures.  Saturno’s oeuvre figured prominently in the coursework, come to think of it, as the highest aesthetic expression of these bourgeois contradictions: the Meta-Labyrinth, in which the left becomes the right, the exit to the labyrinth becomes the Minotaur, and so forth.
When we graduated from the American unversity, Roger went off to fill the post that his father had set aside for him in Warsaw; and I returned to Buenos Aires under the illusion that I was now a “writer with SUR.”






“Hiciste bien Italo,” dijo Julio cuando reunimos después en el Café Funes, “Ahora toma el crédito por sus acciones.”
Sobre la mesa—esta misma mesa en donde estoy sentado ahora—deslizaba un carné del Partido, como quien desliza pieza de ajedrez.
Yo pude hasta comprender que el gesto de Julio fue un acto de mucha valentía y digamos hasta amor paterno, pues para el gobierno soviético yo ya había cumplido mi función y era expendible.  Entendí, además, que fue mi última oportunidad de salvarme la vida.  Pero la jugada maestra de Saturno de haberme mandado a una universidad gringa fue decisiva.  No sentí sino un odio infinito por mi salvador y la euforia de tomar la salvación que me ofrecía y usarla para arruinarlo.
Paré de la mesa.
“Quizás vas a poder desaparecer del mundo, Italo,” dejó caer Julio entonces sus palabras tan clarividentes, “pero jamás te vas a poder desaparecer de ti mismo.”
Cuando reunimos por última vez esa noche en la sala de Saturno no quedaba más sino confesarle todo a mi padre.  Subí las escaleras y abrí la puerta ya entreabierta de su estudio.  Estaba sentado ante el escritorio con sus legendarios ojos de humo fijados en el humo de la nada, fingiendo no estar pendiente de las conversaciones que subían desde la primera planta.
“Papá,” empecé, pero al abrir mi boca él abrió la suya:
“Hijo, he arreglado para hundir la plataforma petrolero mañana a las diez.  Usted vendrá las acciones en la Bolsa a las ocho.  Después acompañará mi socio hasta la plataforma.  Quiero que estés presente cuando estallan las primeras cargas explosivas de modo que nadie dudará que fuese accidente.”
Tanto mi padre Saturno como Julio.  Julio tanto como Saturno, mi padre.
“Julio te ganó por un día, papá,” le dije, y bajé las escaleras y cogí mi gorro para salir.
“¿A dónde va el poeta menor?”dijo Julio cuando cruzaba el zaguán.
“A casarme y tener hijos…” les dije, aunque me costara la vida.

*	*	*

Pasé el resto de la noche caminando por la ciudad sin rumbo, esperando que Julio saliera de algún pasillo o rincón oscuro con un revolver en su mano para asesinarme.
Pero al amanecer me encontré todavía con vida en la Plaza de Mayo.  Era la hora de nacer las sombras del sol, pero todavía se veía la sombra de los faroles también.  A nuestros pies yacían varias sombras, una sombra por cada farol que nos rodeaba.
“¿No vendiste las acciones, hijo?” dijo una voz ronca de las sombras.
Era Saturno, mi padre.  Me había buscado toda la noche.
Igual que con Julio hubiera sido fácil salvarme, inventar excusas, decir que Julio me había manipulado, que las comunistas me habían engañado, que fui inocente.  Pero eso es la verdadera escoria de nosotros, ¿no?—no que no podemos salvarnos de la ennui de nuestras vidas patéticas, sino que al fin y al cabo no queremos.
Apagó un farol en el borde de la plaza, y a los pies de Saturno apagó uno de sus muchas sombras.  Partió y no nos volvimos a ver.
O sí, ahora que recuerdo bien, nos alcanzamos a volvernos a ver una vez más, muchos años después.  Era en la ocasión de la publicación de su magnum opus, Telarañas.  Timbré en la puerta y alguien descolgó el citófono al otro lado pero guardó silencio.  Por ciertos talentos de clarividencia que tenemos las fantasmas pude saber que fue él—pude verlo en su estudio al otro lado del ronco túnel del citófono, su cara de duda burlona de quien entablara dialogo con el vacío, su bastón y vaso de vino olvidado a un lado y su mano sobre el botón “speak.”  Y él, siendo Saturno, por supuesto indefectiblemente sabía que era yo.
Seguí por mi camino.  Los meseros ya colocaban las mesas de los cafés en sus andenes respectivos y las ediciones matinales llegaban a los quioscos de venta.  Compré uno y me dirigí hacia el Café Funes silbando Calambuche como si fuera a comenzar otro día cualquiera.  Me senté en las mesas del andén, esta misma mesa en que estoy sentado hoy, y abrí mi periódico.  Al otro lado de las páginas ya repicaba las pisadas de paso firme, cada vez más cercas.
“Julio,” pensé, sin bajar el periódico.  Pero en el otro instante mis ojos cayeron sobre la foto y el titular:

Cadáver de Escritor SUD Encontrado Esta Mañana en Río de la Plata

La foto de Julio.
	“Entonces ¿quién?” pensé, mientras las pisadas de cuero fino repicaban cada vez más cerca, hasta llegar a mi mesa.
Bajé el periódico.
“¡Old bean!”
Posado justo sobre la foto de Julio, como pajarito sobre ramo, el sonrisón de mi colega universitaria, Roger.
“¡Roger, old sport!” le dije, de una alegría casi autentica.
“Cielos,” dijo Roger, “¿cuánto tiempo sin vernos?”
“Diez años, por allí,” respondí, “¿Qué tal Warsaw, mi amigo?”
“Frío, mi amigo, frío.”
Sentí una picadura de envidia, pues en el sonrisón de Roger se veía que había logrado lo que no pude—había logrado mantener intacta su vanidad universitaria.  En efecto sería con el mismo sonrisón que diría a la prensa, décadas después en Yakarta y en el momento culminante de su carrera: “Sí, al General Suharto le dimos los nombres, y ahora pueda que la sangre de esa gente esté en mis manos, pero eso no es de todo malo, ¿cierto que no?”
“Veo que has leído el periódico,” dijo, “entonces ya tendrás una idea mas o menos de que se trata esto…”
“Mas o menos…”
“Somos colegas, old bean.  Ahora quiero que seamos socios…”
Sentí, además, agradecido.  Yo ya estaba despierto a la realidad.  No iba a ser nunca un escritor del calibre de los del círculo SUD, pero me faltaba la valentía de suicidarme.  ¿Quién sabía cuándo llegaría la próxima oportunidad de poner fin a semejante miseria?  ¡Quizás yo tendría una esposa y tres hijos!  El mismo Roger ya tenía cinco.
	“Son pocos los que reciben una segunda oportunidad, old bean.  A Julio no le dieron eso.  Pero vos y yo somos colegas old bean, y ahora quiero que seamos socios.  El carro nos espera en la otra cuadra…”
	“¿No vas a tomar un café, old sport?” fueron mis últimas palabras, pues por mi sonrisa insulsa Roger entendía que no me iba a convencer.  En el otro momento ya tuve las dos balas de su revolver en mi frente.
“Gracias Funes.”
	“Con el mayor gusto, Italo.”
Funes retira mi carajillo sin tocar, el negro del espresso ya mezclado con el negro de unas gotas de sangre caídas de las heridas en mi frente, igual como hace cuarenta y siete años; la misma exhalación de brillantina y naftalina de solapes negros cruzados, la misma gentileza y tin-tin-tin de cuchara contra platillo de manos decrépitos.
Ahora yuxtaponen a las imágenes del misil “Exocet” y del avión “Super-Etenard” otros de Margaret Thatcher caminando por corredores de alfombra roja y de la junta militar sentada detrás unos podios llenos de bouquets de micrófonos.  Pero ni siquiera son las imágenes verdaderas de lo que sucedió ayer sino imágenes de archivo que tienen como propósito darnos entender cómo Margaret Thatcher y sus homólogos Argentinos caminaron ayer por corredores de alfombra roja, paraban detrás de podios y dejaron al mundo saber sus pensamientos sobre “lo que sucedió ayer.”  Son imágenes que aportan la ilusión no más de enterarnos de lo que sucedió ayer, a calmar un antojo, y dejarnos a salvo una vez más de enterarnos de verdad de la verdad a que estos espejismos semióticos quieren conducir.  Y Funes, por juzgar por su cara de perdido, está aún más perdido que yo.
Pobre Funes, el bueno.  Hizo esfuerzo.  Cambió los retratos de Trotsky y Mayakovsky por los de Eva Peron y Carlos Gardel, y hace poco que instaló el televisor de blanco y negro amarrado al marco oxidado de la marquesina burdea.  Pero no, pese a sus esfuerzos no va a lograr a atraer a la nueva especie de clientela que habitan a Buenos Aires hoy día.  Será un milagro si el pobre viejo no quiebra este año.
Otro año.  Desvanezco en el olvido otra vez, en mi propia mirada de olvido y de perdido.  No siendo más, a buscar un buen hombro sobre cual leer en las bibliotecas de Moscú.  Lo digo con sonrisa burlona pero no es de burlar.  Las palabras de Julio resultaron ser verdaderas.  Ni siquiera en la muerte soy capaz de desaparecer de mi mismo.  Supongo que esto es el infierno, pero lo triste ni es eso.  Lo realmente triste es que no sabría esperar más, así que fácilmente podría ser el cielo.


Por eso será que el laberinto, como arquetipo de nuestra vida cotidiana, está siempre construido a base de sombreados, gradaciones y sutilezas, y jamás de distinciones absolutas.

Las cosas que antes no eran lo mismo ya lo son.  No son las mismas cosas hoy que las fueron las mismas ayer.  Todo son señales, un laberinto de reflejos de señales de espejismos de señales, sin llegar nunca a la verdad significada.  Esto es el elisio de las burguesas, tanto deseado por nosotros, de que la fantasía de señales que no significan nada nunca acaba.  Soy testigo de ello.

Fue sobre esta misma mesa que Julio me deslizó la pistola y el carné del Partido, como quien desliza pieza de ajedrez, y que me dijo, “El asunto no es de desaparecer del mundo, Italo, sino de desaparecer de uno mismo.”
(Algo de amenaza había en esa última frase de Julio, claro.  Pero más que amenaza había su habitual clarividencia de verdadero poeta-soldado—a manera de César Vallejo—de poeta cuyas estrofas fuesen mas acción que tinta, pues en las décadas que siguieron nuestro último encuentro no he hecho más que comprobar sus palabras.)

Me levanté de la mesa.  Me levanté consciente de que levantarme significaba mi muerte, pero mi muerte ya era poco ante la gratificación de arruinarlo.  Fue entonces que me dijo:
	
Algo de amenaza había en esas palabras, claro.  Pero más que amenaza había verdad, pues ni siquiera en la muerte he logrado desaparecer de mi mismo.

La oportunidad de dejar atrás el laberinto de espejismos en que mi padre me tenía atrapado, una vida no para la poesía sino hecho de ella.  Pero eso es la tristeza del laberinto, ¿no?—no de que no podemos, sino de que, al fin y al cabo, no queremos triunfar.

Aquí, en esta mesa, Julio y yo nos sentábamos a hablar literatura.  Puedo confesar sin arrogancia que siempre tuve cierta talento innato para la vanidad, pero el crédito para la prepotencia mundial que me hizo capaz de considerarme un escritor de SUD lo tiene mi padre, Saturno, quien tuvo el genio de mandarme a una universidad gringa.
Así que no debo caer en el engaño de que estas imágenes, por tan solo parecer parecidas, tengan algo que ver con el hundimiento de la plataforma petrolera de mi padre, Saturno Malacoda.

Todo son señales, un laberinto de reflejos de señales de espejismos de señales, sin llegar nunca al significado.  Tal cual es el elisio de las burguesas, lo máximo que somos capaces de desear—que los infinitos corredores de reflejos y espejismos no conducen nunca a la plenitud que pretenden reflejar.

(Por eso será que el laberinto está construido a base de una dualidad binaria absoluta—la vuelta a la derecha versus la vuelta a la izquierda, la salida versus el minotauro, etc.—y jamás de gradaciones y sutilezas.)
